reference/other-tools: include rust-coreutils in sudo-rs (#775)
canonical/ubuntu-server-documentation: docs/reference/other-tools/sudo-rs.md

---
myst:
  html_meta:

>     description: "Reference documentation for Ubuntu Server’s Rust-based replacements for sudo and GNU coreutils, highlighting differences, release-specific exceptions, and important changes for users"

Reviewer: This is now a bit too long - we need to cut this down to a max of 160 characters :/

>     description: "Reference documentation for Ubuntu Server’s Rust-based replacements for sudo and GNU coreutils, highlighting differences, release-specific exceptions, and important changes for users"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    description: "Reference page for Ubuntu’s Rust-based replacements for sudo and GNU coreutils, highlighting differences, release-specific exceptions, and important changes."
```

Reviewer: This cuts it down to 156 - lmk if this works for you

Author: Thanks! I think that works well.

---

# System utility replacements

> Starting with Ubuntu 25.10, the "oxidization" of Ubuntu (see [Ubuntu Discourse][oxiziding-ubuntu-reference]) changed the providers of the system utilities

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting with Ubuntu 25.10, the ["oxidization" of Ubuntu](https://discourse.ubuntu.com/t/carefully-but-purposefully-oxidising-ubuntu/56995) changed the providers of the system utilities
```

`coreutils` and `sudo` to new Rust-based implementations. Previous Ubuntu
releases retain their existing default providers.

- **`coreutils`**: changed from [GNU Coreutils][gnu-coreutils-manual-reference] to [uutils Coreutils][uutils-coreutils-manual-reference]
- **`sudo`**: changed from [`sudo.ws`][sudo-ws-manual-reference] to [`sudo-rs`][sudo-rs-project-reference]

For most users, no changes are required for normal usage. The new Rust-based
implementations are intended to be drop-in replacements for the existing
utilities, so existing commands and usage should generally continue to work
as before. This page describes known differences, incompatibilities, and other
considerations that may affect specific use cases.

GNU Coreutils and `sudo.ws` continue to receive maintenance in Ubuntu releases
where they are the default providers. In newer releases where the Rust-based
implementations are the default, **GNU Coreutils and sudo.ws remain available
as providers**, while the Rust-based implementations are the primary ones
going forward.

> [oxiziding-ubuntu-reference]: https://discourse.ubuntu.com/t/carefully-but-purposefully-oxidising-ubuntu/56995

Reviewer: We don't use this convention of link gathering in the Server docs - links should be at the place they appear in the text, otherwise it can become difficult to find them, with no real gain in source legibility. Please redistribute these links to where they're found in the doc.

Author: Ah yes, that is reasonable. These in-place definitions tend to be lost otherwise yes.

Author: Fixed in: https://github.com/canonical/ubuntu-server-documentation/pull/775/commits/e74bf614e51c240226771d6f11f9435a545a4645

| **Ubuntu 26.04 LTS** | `cp`, `df`, `mv`, `rm`, `true` |
| **Ubuntu 26.10 and later** | **None** |

:::{note}
Although the `rust-coreutils` package is available in Ubuntu 24.04 LTS, it
cannot be configured as the default `coreutils`. The
`coreutils-from-<provider>` packages required to switch the provider are only
available starting with Ubuntu 25.10.
:::

### Switching the coreutils provider (Ubuntu 25.10 and later)

The `coreutils-from-<provider>` packages are available starting with Ubuntu
25.10 and determine which coreutils provider is used on the system. By
default, the `coreutils-from-uutils` package is installed.

When switching providers, the `--allow-remove-essential` option is required
because `apt` sees the currently active `coreutils` package as `Essential`.
Switching providers therefore requires explicitly allowing `apt` to remove that
package.

:::{note}
`update-alternatives` is not currently suitable for switching between GNU
Coreutils and uutils Coreutils, as alternatives are not safe for `Essential`
packages. Instead, use the `coreutils-from-<provider>` packages to switch
providers.
:::

**To switch to GNU Coreutils:**

> ```shell

Reviewer: Please use terminal blocks instead of markdown code blocks. I can't paste an example here because GitHub doesn't render them properly in this preview, but you can see [examples in this page](https://github.com/canonical/ubuntu-server-documentation/blob/main/docs/tutorial/welcome-to-the-terminal.md) that you can copy/paste

Author: Terminal blocks look much better!

Fixed in: https://github.com/canonical/ubuntu-server-documentation/pull/775/commits/e74bf614e51c240226771d6f11f9435a545a4645

implementations are intended to be drop-in replacements for the existing
utilities, so existing commands and usage should generally continue to work
as before. This page describes known differences, incompatibilities, and other
considerations that may affect specific use cases.

GNU Coreutils and `sudo.ws` continue to receive maintenance in Ubuntu releases
where they are the default providers. In newer releases where the Rust-based
implementations are the default, **GNU Coreutils and sudo.ws remain available
as providers**, while the Rust-based implementations are the primary ones
going forward.

(rust-coreutils)=
## rust-coreutils

This section lists helpful resources and tips regarding the new Rust-based
implementation of `coreutils`, provided by the `rust-coreutils` package.
The `rust-coreutils` package is available for installation on Ubuntu 24.04 LTS
and later.

Refer to the [uutils Coreutils Documentation](https://uutils.org/coreutils/docs/index.html) for information about its usage.

### Release-specific exceptions

The `rust-coreutils` package provides implementations of all `coreutils`
utilities, which can also be invoked through its `coreutils` multi-call binary.

> However, starting with Ubuntu 25.10, the `coreutils-from-<provider>` packages

Author: Don't like the "However" part here, it's unnecessary

---
myst:
  html_meta:

>     description: "Reference documentation for migrated tools outlining differences to the former, to guide users of Ubuntu Server on the new implementations."

Reviewer: "migrated tools" is a bit vague. Is there a more specific/descriptive phrasing we can use to guide users to understand specifically what tools have been migrated?

Author: Hmm good question, I agree. One idea is "oxidised" tools, but that also feels a bit vague. Let me think about this.

Author: Suggestion in: https://github.com/canonical/ubuntu-server-documentation/pull/775/commits/f4fab366f3e0bc1cf3aa980afd3d849fcd892519

---

# Migrated tools

> The “oxidisation” of Ubuntu (see [Ubuntu Discourse](https://discourse.ubuntu.com/t/carefully-but-purposefully-oxidising-ubuntu/56995)) has changed the providers of a number of packages that are installed by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [“oxidization” of Ubuntu](https://discourse.ubuntu.com/t/carefully-but-purposefully-oxidising-ubuntu/56995) has changed the providers of a number of packages that are installed by default.
```

Reviewer: It would be good to be more specific here, as well. Instead of "a number of packages", let's state explicitly which packages have changed, and from which provider to what. In the intro section, we need to help a reader to understand if this page is relevant to their needs or not.

I'll leave it up to you how you want to describe the changes, it doesn't need to be super detailed for the intro but it should be specific enough to help a user who doesn't follow Ubuntu news to understand that this is about certain system utilities, and what the migration means for them.

Author: True! This phrasing was used in order to also apply if more oxidized packages where added, but I see now that this is at the cost of clarity.

Author: Fixed in: https://github.com/canonical/ubuntu-server-documentation/pull/775/commits/f4fab366f3e0bc1cf3aa980afd3d849fcd892519

> This page provides guidance for Ubuntu Server users on the new implementations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page provides guidance on the new implementations.
```

Author: Fixed in: https://github.com/canonical/ubuntu-server-documentation/pull/775/commits/f4fab366f3e0bc1cf3aa980afd3d849fcd892519

(rust-coreutils)=
## rust-coreutils

> uutils is the default coreutils provider as of Ubuntu 25.10. This section lists

Reviewer: This is a bit confusing. The title is `rust-coreutils`, but then you're talking about `uutils` and coreutils, but later switch back again. I think we need a little more detail to make this switch clearer:
- What was the default provider before 25.10?
- What's the difference between rust-coreutils and uutils?
- Are there any Ubuntu releases where uutils is not available? (i.e. has it been backported)
- Will the previous default be deprecated at some point or is it going to remain available?
- What are the implications of the change/does the user need to do anything different?
(some of these questions might just be for me, but I'm approaching this from the PoV of someone who isn't familiar with this)

Author: Good points! Regarding `rust-coreutils` vs. `uutils`: I was a bit unsure how to put it while still remaining correct. What makes it a bit confusing is that "uutils coreutils" is the *actual* implementation, and `rust-coreutils` is the packaged name for it we use. I.e. `uutils` is a collection of CLI utilities rewritten in Rust. 

We use the package `coreutils-from-uutils` for setting the `rust-coreutils` as default. I preferred `rust-coreutils` as the title since that is what most people will think of it as/relate to.

One solution could be to move the mentioning of `uutils` and simply state the first sentence as something like "A Rust-based implementation of the coreutils" instead.

Author: Mostly fixed in: https://github.com/canonical/ubuntu-server-documentation/pull/775/commits/f4fab366f3e0bc1cf3aa980afd3d849fcd892519

Still have to answer:

> Are there any Ubuntu releases where uutils is not available? (i.e. has it been backported)

> Will the previous default be deprecated at some point or is it going to remain available?

> What are the implications of the change/does the user need to do anything different?

Author: Fixed now in: https://github.com/canonical/ubuntu-server-documentation/pull/775/commits/13ebccc1c8a9a1a8ef02eee06165c252841d549a

helpful resources and tips regarding the migration.

> Refer to the [uutils Coreutils Documentation](https://uutils.org/coreutils/docs/index.html) for information about uutils.

Reviewer: The spellchecker isn't happy about uutils or coreutils where they appear in the text. Can we put these into backticks to render them as inline code? (this avoids triggering the spellchecker)

Author: Sure thing!

Author: I tested it out and I fear it has an effect on the readability of the text. Is it possible to add these to the vocabulary or add some ignore for them?

Reviewer: the simplest way is probably to add them to the `docs/.custom_wordlist.txt` file, otherwise it makes the source file unreadable too :D

Author: Hahah exactly! I looked it up and there would have to be horrible Vale HTML for each word we want to ignore.

Author: Fixed in: https://github.com/canonical/ubuntu-server-documentation/pull/775/commits/168756dabacdb608e39e3a07cc8a22e60defebf2

### Exceptions per releases

Due to known incompatibilities, some utilities in `rust-coreutils` are still

> provided by GNU for the Ubuntu 25.10 and 26.04 releases. Redirected utilities

Reviewer: ```suggestion
provided by GNU for the Ubuntu 25.10 and Ubuntu 26.04 LTS releases. Redirected utilities
```

Author: Fixed in: https://github.com/canonical/ubuntu-server-documentation/commit/f4fab366f3e0bc1cf3aa980afd3d849fcd892519

per release are as follows:

| Release | Utilities still provided by GNU |
|---|---|
| **Ubuntu 25.10** ([reference][ubuntu-25.10-reference]) | `chmod`, `chown`, `cp`, `df`, `mv`, `rm`, `true` |

> | **Ubuntu 26.04** ([reference][ubuntu-26.04-reference]) | `cp`, `df`, `mv`, `rm`, `true` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Ubuntu 26.04 LTS** ([reference][ubuntu-26.04-reference]) | `cp`, `df`, `mv`, `rm`, `true` |
```

Author: Fixed in: https://github.com/canonical/ubuntu-server-documentation/commit/f4fab366f3e0bc1cf3aa980afd3d849fcd892519

| **Ubuntu 26.10 and later** | — |

[ubuntu-25.10-reference]: https://git.launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/coreutils-from/tree/debian/coreutils-from-uutils.links?h=ubuntu/questing-devel
[ubuntu-26.04-reference]: https://git.launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/coreutils-from/tree/debian/coreutils-from-uutils.links?h=ubuntu/resolute-devel

### Changing provider

The installed `coreutils-from-*` package determines which coreutils provider is

> used on the system.

Reviewer: If there are any restrictions per release (i.e. any where the package is not available) please mention them here to make it clear before any user tries to use the commands on an incompatible release

Author: Ah yes, thanks! Will do

Author: Fixed in: https://github.com/canonical/ubuntu-server-documentation/commit/f4fab366f3e0bc1cf3aa980afd3d849fcd892519

[sudo-rs-project-reference]: https://github.com/trifectatechfoundation/sudo-rs

(rust-coreutils)=
## rust-coreutils

This section lists helpful resources and tips regarding the new Rust-based
implementation of `coreutils`, provided by the `rust-coreutils` package.

Refer to the [uutils Coreutils Documentation](https://uutils.org/coreutils/docs/index.html) for information about its usage.

### Release-specific exceptions

Due to known incompatibilities, some utilities continue to be provided by GNU
Coreutils instead of `rust-coreutils` in Ubuntu 25.10 and Ubuntu 26.04 LTS.
The utilities provided by GNU Coreutils in each release are as follows:

| Release | Utilities provided by GNU Coreutils |
|---|---|
| **Ubuntu 24.04 LTS and earlier** | **All** |
| **Ubuntu 25.10** | `chmod`, `chown`, `cp`, `df`, `mv`, `rm`, `true` |
| **Ubuntu 26.04 LTS** | `cp`, `df`, `mv`, `rm`, `true` |
| **Ubuntu 26.10 and later** | **None** |

:::{note}
Although the `rust-coreutils` package is available in Ubuntu 24.04 LTS, it
cannot be configured as the default `coreutils`. The
`coreutils-from-<provider>` packages required to switch the provider are only

> available starting with Ubuntu 26.04 LTS.

Author: Should this be 25.10? I'm a bit uncertain since that's EoL
